---
layout: default
title: "POLSC432: Civil Liberties and Civil Rights"
course_description: "An exploration of the evolving opinions and doctrines of the U.S. Supreme Court, with particular emphasis on the civil liberties and rights of individuals and groups. Examines specific case law, including post-September 11th detainees, the use of secret courts, same-sex marriage, immigration, and abortion."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "POLSC432: Civil Liberties and Civil Rights"
----------------------------------------------------------------

The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with civil rights
and civil liberties in the United States. While much of the reading will
focus on court cases, it is not a course on the law or on the courts.
Rather, this is a course on constitutional politics. The focus will
center on understanding how a free society governs and controls itself.
The material will address evolving opinions and doctrines of the United
States Supreme Court that focus on the civil liberties and rights of
both individuals and groups. This material will emphasize cases with
particular relevance to political controversies of both the past and
present such as the following: the civil liberties in a post-September
11<sup>th</sup> country, same-sex marriage, racial equality, gender
equality, pornography, as well as speech and privacy in general. The
design of this course will encourage students to take a historical view
to understand contemporary issues. As mentioned above, this course
primarily will explore the doctrines of the Court. This means that the
substance of the judicial arguments and justifications for revision,
rejection and replacement of long-standing precedent, and how the Court
reasons and argues for a particular interpretation of the Constitution
will all be examined. The course will also consider the political role
of the Court investigating how the Court’s priorities have evolved over
time and how it has responded to developments in the other branches of
the government. Altogether, the purpose of the course is to provide
students with a firm grasp of the theoretical and philosophical concepts
that both shaped and continue to influence the rights and liberties
afforded to citizens in the United States.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:  

-   Interpret Supreme Court opinions.
-   Describe their own understanding of the Constitution as related to
    citizen rights and liberties.
-   Discuss the historical development of equality across individuals
    and groups in the United States.
-   Evaluate the constitutionality of laws that either afford or
    restrict the rights and liberties of citizens.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course you must:  
    
 √    Have access to a computer.  
    
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
    
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.,
Adobe Reader or Flash).  
    
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
    
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.).  
    
 √    Be competent in the English language.  
    
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook.](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf)

### Course Information

Welcome to POLSC432.  Below, please find general information on the
course and its requirements.  
    
 **Primary Resources**: This course is composed of a range of different
free, online materials.  However, the course makes primary use of the
following materials:  

-   FindLaw.com
-   PBS, Landmark Court Cases by Alex McBride
-   *[American Government and Politics in the Information
    Age](http://www.saylor.org/site/textbooks/American%20Government%20and%20Politics%20in%20the%20Information%20Age.pdf)*

**Requirements for Completion**: In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials. 
Unit 1 will lay the foundation for understanding the difference between
liberties and rights. This will be essential to understanding the rest
of the course. Then the units that follow will cover a series of
specific topics (e.g. speech, race, gender, etc.). Each will begin with
the history of that topic as related to civil rights and liberties in
the United States followed by material covering the constitutional
issues and development related to each respective topic. This material
will all prepare you for the Final Exam.  
    
 In order to “pass” this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher
on the Final Exam.  Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as
you complete it.  If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.  
    
 **Time Commitment**: This course should take you a total of 108 hours
to complete.  Each unit includes a “time advisory” that lists the amount
of time you are expected to spend on each subunit. These should help you
plan your time accordingly.  It may be useful to take a look at these
time advisories and to determine how much time you have over the next
few weeks to complete each unit, and then to set goals for yourself. 
For example, Unit 1 should take you 9 hours.  Perhaps you can sit down
with your calendar and decide to complete subunit 1.1 (a total of 4.5
hours) on Monday night and Tuesday night; then subunits 1.2 (a total of
2.5 hours) on Wednesday night; then subunit 1.3 (2 hours) on Thursday
night; etc.  
    
 **Tips/Suggestions**: Successful completion of this course will require
both historical knowledge and logic. The historical knowledge will help
you to understand how to interpret court cases. It is important to try
to think about the context within which many of the decisions centered
on people’s rights were being made. What may seem like a clear violation
of rights to us was not so clear to people existing in a time with
different values. Thus, considering context will help clarify the
material.  
    
 Also, as you read, take careful notes on a separate sheet of paper. 
Mark down any important concepts and definitions that stand out to you. 
It will be useful to use this “cheat sheet” as a review prior to
completing the final exam.

### Preliminary Information

-   ***American Government and Politics in the Information Age***

    Link: [*American Government and Politics in the Information
    Age*](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/POLSC432American-Government-and-Politics-in-the-Information-Age-Attributed.pdf) (PDF)  
      
     You will be prompted to read sections of this book throughout the
    course.  You may choose to download the text in full now and skip to
    the appropriate section as prompted by the instructions in the
    resource boxes below, or you can simply download the specific
    sections of the text assigned as you progress through each resource
    box.  
      
     Terms of Use: The text was adapted by The Saylor Foundation under
    the [<span class="s1">Creative Commons
    Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0
    License</span>](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/) without
    attribution as requested by the work's original creator or licensee.


